[foreboding music]
[ominous music]
- Ismene,
listen.
The same blood
flows in both our veins,
doesn't it, my sister?
The blood of Oedipus.
And suffering,
which was his destiny,
is our punishment too,
the sentence passed
on all his children:
physical pain, contempt,
insults, every kind of dishonor.
We've seen them all and
endured them all, the two of us.
But there's more to come.
Now,
today...
Have you heard it?
This new proclamation
which the king has made
to the whole city?
Have you heard how those
nearest to us are to be treated,
with a contempt that we reserve
for traitors,
people we love?
- Nobody has told me anything,
Antigone.
I've heard nothing, neither good
nor bad, about anyone we love,
not since the battle, I mean,
the terrible news that
both our brothers were dead.
One day, one battle,
and fratricide twice over,
each brother
cutting down his own flesh.
But the army from Argos
retreated last night.
I have heard that, nothing else
to cheer me up
or depress me further.
- I thought you hadn't.
That's why I asked you
to meet me here,
where I can tell you
everything
without any risk
of being overheard.
[loud clanging]
- What is it, then?
More terrible news?
Something black and frightening,
I can see that.
- Well, what do you think,
Ismene?
Perhaps you can guess.
We have two brothers,
both of them dead,
and Creon has decreed
that a decent burial
shall be given to one
but not to the other.
Eteocles apparently
has already been buried
with full military honors
not far short
of a state funeral,
with all the formalities due
to the dead meticulously observed,
so that his rest
in the underworld
amongst the heroes is assured.
But Polynices,
who died in agony
just as certainly as his brother did,
is not to be buried at all.
The decree
makes that quite plain.
He is to be left
lying where he fell,
with no tears
or ceremonies of mourning,
to stink in the open
till the kites and vultures
catch the scent
and tear him to pieces
and pick him to the bone!
Left unburied, there is no rest
for him in the underworld,
no more than here.
What a great king our Creon is,
eh, sister?
It's against us, you realize,
and against me in particular
that he has published
this decree.
And he'll soon be here himself
to make it public
to the senators and anyone
who may not have heard it.
He isn't bluffing.
He means to act
to make it stick.
The punishment for anyone
who disobeys the order
is public stoning to death.
So that's the news,
and you know it now.
The time has come for you too
to stand up
and be counted with me,
to show whether you are worthy
of the honor
of being Oedipus' daughter.
- Wait a minute, Antigone.
Don't be so headstrong.
If all this is
as you say it is,
what can I do
one way or the other?
- Just say you'll help me.
Commit yourself.
- To do what,
something dangerous?
- Just to give me a hand
to lift the body.
It's too heavy
for me to move on my own.
- To bury him, you mean,
in spite of the decree?
- He is my brother.
And whatever you say,
he's yours too.
I won't betray him
now that he's dead.
No one will ever
throw that in my face.
- You can't do it.
Creon has publicly forbidden it.
- He cannot forbid me
to love my brother.
He has neither the right
nor the power to do that.
- Have you forgotten
what happened to our father?
Contempt and loathing
from everyone,
even from himself,
that was his reward,
and blinded too by his own hand.
And his mother-wife,
as ill-matched with him
as those two words are
with each other,
she knotted a rope
and hanged herself.
And now our two brothers,
both in one day
caught in the same trap,
claiming blood for blood
and death for death,
each one
at the expense of the other.
We are the last ones left,
sister.
And what a death
is promised for us,
more terrible than any
if we break the law
by defying the king
and the power of the state.
Think for a moment,
Antigone, please.
We're women, that's all.
Physically weaker and barred
from any political influence,
how can we fight
against the institutionalized
strength of the male sex?
They are in power,
and we have to obey them,
or worse tyrannies than these
may be inflicted upon us.
May God forgive me
and the spirits of the dead;
we have no choice.
State power commands,
and we must do as we are told.
When you are powerless,
wild gestures
and heroic refusals
are reserved for madmen.
- Don't say any more.
I won't ask again.
In fact, if you were to offer help now,
I would refuse it.
Do as you please.
I intend to bury my brother.
And if I die in the attempt,
I shall die in the knowledge
that I have acted justly,
and that will be
a kind of happiness.
I shall lie peacefully
beside my brother
whom I loved in my actions
as well as in words.
Our lives are short.
We have too little time
to waste it on men
and the laws they make.
The approval of the dead
is everlasting,
and I shall bask in it
as I lie among them.
Do as you please.
Live, by all means.
The laws you will break
are not of man's making.
- I reverenced them,
but how can I defy
the unlimited power of the state?
What weapons of mine
are strong enough for that?
- Fine.
That's a good excuse.
I'll go and shovel the earth
on my brother's body.
- I'm frightened, Antigone,
and frightened for you.
- Don't be frightened for me.
Fear for yourself.
- For God's sake,
keep it quiet.
Don't tell anyone.
I'll keep our meeting secret.
- Don't you dare.
You must tell everyone.
Shout it in the streets.
If you keep it quiet,
I shall begin to hate you.
- There's a fire burning
in you, Antigone,
but it makes me go cold
just to hear you.
- Well, I'm not doing it
to please you.
- You won't do it at all.
You're bound to fail.
- I shall fail when I have failed
and not before.
- But you know it's hopeless.
Why begin when you know
there's no way you can succeed?
- Be quiet,
before I begin to despise you
for talking so feebly.
He will despise you too,
and justly.
You can go now.
Go!
If I'm mad, you can leave me
here with my madness,
which will doubtless
destroy me soon enough.
Death is the worst thing
that can happen,
and some deaths
are more honorable than others.
- If you've made your mind up,
Antigone, it's madness.
Remember, I love you,
whatever happens.
- The life-giving Sun
has never shone more brightly
on the seven gates of Thebes
than he shines this morning.
- Never a more glorious dawning
than this sunrise
over Dirke's river,
when the army
of the foreign invader
at first light
made its panic-stricken flight
and all its white shields
and its bright weapons
were gone.
- Like a snowy eagle
from the mountain crest it came
shrieking down on our city...
- The army of Argos
with a spurious treaty
to enforce Polynices' claim...
all: All its horsehair plumes
knotting together
and the grinding of brass
and the creaking of leather.
[chimes clanging]
- By our seven shuttered gates,
it waited...
- Eyes glittering
in dark helmets...
- Swords drawn,
spears couching.
- But before the killing
and burning...
- The metallic
taste of blood...
- And crashing stonework
and blazing wood...
- They turned and fled...
- The music of death
in their ears.
- At their backs,
the dragon's breath.
all: Zeus has seen them,
he who hates inflicted pride
and the empty boasts
of a windbag.
He heard their singing
as if the victory
were theirs for the taking.
- And he brought down
his thunder
on their glittering host.
- Struck them with lightning
and sent them flying...
all: Scorched them
and burned them
and left them dying.
- Down like a rock
from the mountain crest he came,
thundering to Earth,
the flame dashed
from his hand.
- The son of Thebes,
whose best hope of fame
was to conquer his native land
and who failed in his quest.
all: For the war god
gave us his word of command.
Like a battle giant,
his terrible name
ran them down where they stood,
and they died in the dust.
- Now at each
of our seven gates,
a Theban defender waits
as seven champions bring their
fame and armor to the fight.
- And before
the coming of night,
six have put their fame
to the test.
- Six have laid
both fame and armor to rest
as a tribute
at great Zeus' feet.
- At the seventh gate,
two brothers meet,
sharing their blood in death
as in birth.
all: Each striking together,
each laying the other
dead on the earth.
all: There will be
victory celebrations today
in the city of charioteers
and singing in the streets.
There will be seven days
of thanksgiving
and grateful tears
for the end of the fighting
as the enemy retreats
and the time comes
for relaxation and play.
- Now as all voices
are raised
and the drum beats...
- The ecstatic god himself
will appear...
all: Bacchus, the drunkard...
- To take power for one day
in this city he calls his own.
Time to dance all night,
to shake the foundations...
- Till the faint light of dawn
flushes the windows
and the lamps fade.
- Now Creon is king.
He made the most of his fortune
and the gods' choice,
the son of Menoeceus.
As the people rejoice,
the new king enters
to take his throne,
the responsibility: his alone.
- But why has he called us here
to debate an emergency session?
- His new proclamation
so vital to the state.
- Senators,
our country, like a ship at sea,
has survived the hurricane.
The gods who sent it
have navigated us
into calmer waters now.
[applause]
I have chosen
to summon this assembly
because I know I can trust you.
Your predecessors were loyal
and reliable
in King Laius' time.
And when King Oedipus,
in his exceptional wisdom,
restored the fortunes
of this city,
when tragedy struck him
and his rule was ended,
your loyalty to the blood royal
was never questioned.
And you supported his sons
till they too were brought down
on a single day,
incestuously murdered,
each brother
shedding a brother's blood.
By that same blood right,
as next of kin,
I claim the throne
as my inheritance,
both the city and the kingdom.
I claim it,
and I hold it from today
as mine by right.
There is no certain measure
of a man's quality,
the depth of his intellect,
or the maturity
of his judgment
until he is
put to the supreme test
by the exercise
of absolute power in the state.
My own opinion is well known:
the ruler who fears the
consequences of his actions
or who is afraid to act openly
or take the good advice
of his senators
is beneath contempt.
Equally contemptible
is the man who puts
the interests
of his friends or his relations
before his country.
There is nothing good
can be said of him.
Let me make it plain
before the gods,
whose eyes
are in every council chamber:
when I see
any threat to this nation
from whatever direction,
I shall make it public.
No one who is an enemy
of the state
shall ever be
any friend of mine.
The state, the fatherland
is everything to us,
the ship we all sail in.
If she sinks, we all drown,
and friendship drowns with us.
That's my policy,
a policy of service
to the commonwealth.
And in pursuance of that policy,
I have issued
an official state decree
concerning the sons of Oedipus.
Eteocles, who died
fighting for his country
and with exceptional bravery,
we shall bury him
with all the honors
and funeral ceremonies customary
for a man who died a hero.
The other, the outcast,
the exile,
his brother, Polynices,
who returned here
at the head of a foreign army
to destroy his homeland,
burn down this city,
and reduce the people
to a condition of slavery
or kill them in the streets,
I have ordered that
he is to have no grave at all.
No one is to bury him
or mourn for him.
His body is to be
left in the open uncovered,
a stinking feast
for the scavengers,
dogs and crows,
a sight to inspire terror.
I intend to make it quite plain
that never
under my administration
will people who commit
crimes against the state
reap any benefits
from their actions,
and at the expense of honest,
decent citizens too.
The people who serve the state,
alive or dead--
that makes no difference--
I shall honor them
and reward them too.
- Son of Menoeceus,
you are king now.
You have delivered your verdict
and sentence
upon the man
who defended the city
and the man who attacked it
unambiguously.
- Your least word
has the force of law,
and it binds the dead
as well as the living.
We are all at your disposal.
- Make sure then
that my orders are carried out.
- Younger men than us
should implement your policies.
- I don't mean that.
Polynices' body
is already under guard.
- What else must we do?
- What other responsibility
do you lay upon us?
- Not to intrigue
with dissidents
or subversive elements.
- We are not mad, sir.
- We know the law
and the penalty for breaking it.
- Which will be death.
And be in no doubt
I shall enforce it,
because there are always men
who can be bought,
who will risk anything,
even death,
if the bribe is large enough.
- [gasping]
My lord Creon!
Oh, sir!
Oh, I can hardly speak
for lack of breath,
not 'cause I ran.
I kept on stopping,
as a matter of fact,
half a dozen times,
and I hung about
as much as I dared.
I haven't thought about anything
so much for a long time.
Listen!
"Don't hurry," I said to myself.
"Chances are, dimwit,
you're hurrying
to the firing squad."
But then I said to myself,
you see,
"Hang about," I said,
"or, rather, don't,
"because if Creon hears this
from somebody else,
you're really in trouble."
So I hurried here
as slow as I could,
if you see what I mean.
[chuckles]
It's funny
how long a mile can take you
when you're thinking
what I was thinking.
However, duty called in the end,
and I reckoned it would be safer
to face it out.
He may be unimportant,
but I've come here,
so now I'll tell you.
If I'm punished for it,
the gods will be behind it,
that's for sure,
so I wouldn't have
escaped it anyway.
- Have sense, man.
Why are you frightened?
- Well, first of all, sir,
for myself, like,
my own point of view,
I never done it,
and I didn't see
who else done it neither,
so I shouldn't be punished
for it, should I?
- Is there any need
for all this preamble?
You take great care
to disassociate yourself
from what you say.
It must be bad news.
- It is bad news, sir,
I'm afraid.
I don't know
how to put it for the best.
- The plainest way,
and then we can have done with you.
- Straight out with it, then.
The--
the body's buried.
Well, someone or other--
a handful of dust,
that's all, dry dust,
but properly sprinkled,
you know, religiously,
and then gone, whoever it was.
- Do you know
what you're saying?
Who has dared
to disobey my orders?
- No way of knowing, sir.
We've no idea.
There'd been no digging,
no spade marks or nothing.
The ground's rock hard.
There were no
wheel tracks either,
from a chariot
or cart or anything--
in fact, no clues
of any kind at all,
nothing to tell you
who might have done it.
Well, when the sentry
taking the early turn
discovered what had happened
and reported back,
we were all shattered
and scared stiff.
It was as though
the body had disappeared.
Well, not buried
in a proper grave, I don't mean,
but lightly covered
with a layer of earth,
well, almost as though
some passing stranger
with a religious turn of mind,
knowing that being left unburied
means everlasting anguish
and wandering without rest,
had scattered a few handfuls.
There was no
track of animals either,
not from dogs or anything
that might have gnawed at it
and covered it over
with their own legs
like they do a bone.
A real row started then,
I can tell you.
We all shouted at each other,
and it could have been a fight.
There was no one there
to stop us.
Well, any one of us
could have done it.
We all suspected each other,
but we all denied it,
and there was no evidence
to prove one man guilty
rather than another.
So then we all dared each other
to swear to go
through fire and water,
to hold red-hot pokers
in our hands
and call all the gods
as witnesses that we hadn't done it
and didn't know anyone who had
or would even think of it,
let alone do it.
And none of any of it
got us nowhere.
Then one of the fellows
had his say,
and he scared us all shitless,
I can tell you.
He said--
and we knew he was dead right--
there was no way out of it.
We had to do it
and take our chances.
This fellow said one of us lot
must tell the king,
because we can't just hide it,
can we?
So that's what he said,
and we knew he was right.
So we decided
we'd have to draw lots.
And just my luck,
I drew the short straw.
So here I am,
and I don't like telling it,
not one little bit more
than you like hearing it,
for the bloke who brings
bad news never gets a medal.
- My lord Creon,
this policy of yours
has worried me from the start.
- My political instinct
tells me
this may be some sort
of warning or sign
and perhaps from the gods.
- How dare you?
Shut your mouths,
both of you,
before I lose my temper.
And you, if you are
a superannuated fool,
at least don't talk like one.
Is it likely, remotely likely,
that the gods would think twice
over that pile of stinking meat?
By God, it's blasphemy
even to suggest
that they would care a damn
whether he was buried or not,
let alone grant him
an honorable funeral
as though he were one
of their principal supporters.
What?
The man who came
to burn down their temples,
plunder their treasuries,
pull down their statues,
and make a mockery
of all their laws?
Do the gods love criminals
these days?
No, they do not.
But, gentlemen,
there are men in this city,
and I've noted them:
a subversive faction,
enemies of the state,
a cell of oppositionists--
call them what you will--
who reject the laws
and my leadership.
They meet in secret,
nod and whisper
and talk of the great day.
Seditious men they are,
and they are behind this.
Any fool can see that.
Their bribery
has suborned my soldiers
and paid for this demonstration
against my authority.
Money, gentlemen,
money:
the virus that infects mankind
with every sickness
we have a name for,
no greater scourge than that.
Money it is that pounds
great citizens to piles of rubble,
turns people by the millions
into homeless refugees,
takes honest citizens
and corrupts them into doing things
they'd be ashamed to think of
before the fee was mentioned,
and in the end, brings them
into the execution chamber.
Well, whoever they are,
these men who have sold themselves,
they'll find the price
considerably higher
than they thought it was.
You, come here.
Come here!
By Zeus, whom I regard
as my personal patron,
and by all the gods
men worship anywhere,
I swear to you, soldier,
that either
you will find the man
who buried Polynices' body
in defiance
of my express command,
bring him here to me,
the actual man
who has sprinkled the earth--
no other will do--
stand him here in front of me,
or you, soldier,
will die for it.
Death, I promise you,
will be the least of your punishments.
You will be made
a public example
and interrogated
by the security police,
kept standing,
beaten across the feet,
the whole repertoire
of special techniques
at which we excel so much,
until you confess the full range
of this conspiracy:
who paid you, how much,
and for what purpose.
The choice is yours.
Perhaps that indicates where
your own best interests lie.
Crimes against the state
and its laws, you'll find,
are very unprofitable
in the end.
- Am I allowed to speak, sir?
- Why should you speak?
Every word you say
is painful to me.
- Well, it can't be an earache,
can it, sir?
Not what I said.
It must stick in your gullet
or further down maybe,
a sort of pain
in the conscience?
- Do you dare to answer me back
and make jokes
about my conscience?
- Me, sir? No, sir.
I might give you an earache,
I can see that.
I talk too much,
always have done.
But the other pain,
the heartburn as it were,
it's the criminal causing that,
sir, not me.
- Not short of a quick answer,
either.
- No, sir, but I didn't
bury the body.
Not guilty to that, sir.
- Maybe guilty of selling
your eyes for money, eh, sentry?
Looking the other way for cash?
- Oh, you're
an intelligent man, sir,
and well educated, and I'm not.
But in this case,
I'm thinking clearly,
and you're mistaken.
- You can think what you like.
Whatever you think,
if you fail to find
this enemy of the state
and bring him here to me,
you'll find that money,
from whatever source,
will certainly not
save your life.
- Well, let's hope
they find him then,
whoever he is.
The one thing I'm sure of:
they won't find me.
I never thought
I'd get out of here alive.
Though when I do get out,
nothing will
bring me back again.
[chuckles]
I've had an amazing
stroke of luck,
and I won't chance my harm
a second time.
all: Is there anything
more wonderful on Earth,
our marvelous planet,
than the miracle of man?
- With an arrogant ease,
he rides the dangerous seas
from the wave's towering summit
to the yawning trough beneath.
- The earth mother herself
before time began,
the oldest of the ageless gods,
learned to endure
his driving plow
turning the earth
and breaking the clods.
all: Tilled by the strength
of his brow,
she yielded up her fruitfulness.
- The quick-witted birds
are no match for him,
neither victim nor predator
among the beasts of her plane
nor the sea's seething masses...
- His cunning
surpasses their instinct.
His skill is the greater.
His snares never fail,
and his nets teem.
- The wild bull
of the savage mountain
and the magnificent stag
who passes like a king
through upland and glen...
- The untamed horse
with his matted tresses uncut
on his neck...
all: All submit to man
and the yoke and the bit,
and his power increases.
- He has mastered
the mysteries of language...
- And thought,
which moves faster
than the wind he has tamed
and made rational...
- Political wisdom too,
all the knowledge of peoples
and states.
- All the practical art
of government
he has studied and refined.
- Built cities
to shelter his head
against rain and danger
and cold...
- And ordered all things
in his mind.
- There is no problem
he cannot resolve
by the exercise of his brains
or his breath.
- And the only disease
he cannot salve or cure is death.
all: In action, he is subtle
beyond imagination.
limitless in his skill,
and these gifts
are both enemies and friends,
as he applies them
with equal determination
to good or to evil ends.
- All men honor
and the state uplifts that man
to the heights of glory
whose powers
uphold the constitution
and the gods and their laws.
His city prospers.
- But if he shifts his ground
and takes the wrong path,
despising morality
and blown up with pride,
indulges himself
and his power...
all: At my hearth
may he never warm himself
or sit at my side.
- But wait.
- I can't believe my eyes.
- Can this be true?
- This is Antigone!
- I recognize her
as clearly as I can see you.
- Her father's destiny
was suffering and pain.
- On all his progeny
misfortunes rain.
- Child, did you openly disobey
the new king's order...
- And bury your brother?
- Do you have to manhandle
her this way?
- We saw it,
actually burying the body,
caught him in the act,
as they say, red-handed,
only it's not a him;
it's a her.
Where's the king?
- He has been informed.
- He is on his way.
- Is this a moment
to disturb the king?
Why do you need me?
What has happened?
- Lord Creon!
I reckon it's always unwise
to swear oaths
and make promises,
even to yourself.
Second thoughts,
nine times out of ten,
will have their say
and end up
by calling you a liar.
It's no time at all
since I've promised myself
I wouldn't be seen dead
here again.
You were angry with me
the last time.
A right mouthful you gave me--
more than enough,
thanks very much.
But you can't beat a real
turn-up for the book, can you?
There's nothing more enjoyable
than a good win
when you're expecting a tousing.
So here I am again,
as the comic said,
and my promises not worth
the air they were spoken with.
This lady's your criminal.
We caught her doing it,
actually setting the grave
to rights.
I brought her here,
and there was no panic this time,
I can tell you,
no retribution or drawing lots.
She was all mine.
I caught her,
and I claim the credit for it.
And now she's all yours.
Take her, and accuse her.
Stone her to death
if you like.
I'm free to go, I hope.
I'm well shot of all of it.
- Where did you arrest her?
Tell me the details.
- She was burying him.
What else is there to say?
- Are you out of your mind?
Do you realize the implications
of what you're saying?
- Sir, she was
burying the body,
the body you ordered
not to be buried.
I can't speak plainer than that.
- But how did you catch her?
Was she doing it openly?
- Well, gentlemen,
it was like this:
as soon as I got back,
remembering all those threats
or promises you made me,
we brushed all the earth
off the naked body,
which was all wet
and beginning to decay by now.
And we sat up on the ridge,
well to the windward
of the stink,
and we all kept a sharp eye
on each other,
ready to nudge anyone
who dropped off
and tear him off a strip too.
For hours, we sat there
till about midday.
The Sun was smack overhead
blazing down,
and the heat was something
terrible, I can tell you.
Then suddenly, it was as though
a whirlwind blew up.
Definitely a twister it was
but localized, like,
and it raised up a dust storm
which swept along the valley,
tore all the leaves
off of the trees,
blighted out the whole sky,
and completely blinded us.
It seemed like some terrible
manifestation of the gods,
and you had to shut your eyes
to endure it at all.
And then suddenly, it stopped.
And when the air cleared,
we opened our eyes
and saw this girl standing there
beside the grave
sort of wailing,
as though she were in pain
or maybe anger,
just like a bird
that comes back to the nest
and finds the eggs smashed,
all the fledglings gone.
That's what it sounded like.
She was standing there
looking at the naked body
and screaming
and cursing the monsters
who had done such a thing--
us, of course.
Then she crouched down
and picked up a few handfuls
of the dry dust
and scattered it on him.
She carried an urn,
a small bronze
ceremonial thing,
and she poured it
over the dead man three times,
honey and wine and stuff in it,
I suppose,
all the proper ritual
for a funeral, anyway.
Well, as soon as we saw that,
we all came charging down
and arrested her on the spot.
She wasn't frightened
or anything.
She stood her ground.
So then we formally charged her
with the crime,
this and the one before.
And she admitted
she'd done them both.
We were all relieved
to hear that, I can tell you,
but sorry too in a way.
It's very nice to get
out of trouble yourself,
not so nice
when you see someone else
up to their neck in it,
someone you got no quarrel with.
But still, your own life
comes first, I reckon.
You've got to look after
number one.
- And you,
you, with your head down,
what do you say
to this accusation, hmm?
You admit it?
You guilty or not?
- Yes.
I'm guilty.
I don't pretend otherwise.
- You, soldier, get out.
You're free
to go back to your unit.
Count yourself lucky.
Now, tell me
a simple yes or no.
Did you hear of my order
forbidding the burial?
- Of course I heard it.
How could I not?
- Yet you dared
to disobey the law.
- Yes, I did,
because it's your law,
not the law of God,
natural justice,
which is of all times
and places numinous,
not material,
a quality of Zeus, not of kings,
recognizes no such law.
You are merely a man,
mortal, like me.
And laws that you enact
cannot overturn
ancient moralities
or common human decency.
They speak
the language of eternity,
are not written down,
and never change.
They are for today, yesterday,
and all time.
No one understands
where they came from,
but everyone
recognizes their force,
and no man's arrogance or power
can make me disobey them.
I would rather suffer
the disapproval
and punishment of men
than dishonor
such ancient truths.
I shall die,
of course, sometime,
whether you make laws or not.
If my death comes
sooner rather than later,
I shall welcome it.
My life has been misery.
It is misery now, and I shall be
more than happy to leave it.
There will be no pain
and no despair in that.
But to leave my mother's son
out there in the open
unburied,
that would have been
unendurable.
I could not have borne it,
whereas this I shall endure.
By your judgment, of course,
I'm a fool,
but by mine,
the judge is the criminal,
not the accused.
- This is her father talking.
- Stubborn; like him,
she won't give way.
- Not even with the whole power
of the state against her.
- Well, we shall see.
Any man can be broken,
and often the most committed
and determined break soonest.
Even iron, you know,
left lying in the fire too long,
becomes over tempered
and will snap.
As soon as a little pressure
is applied,
you can break it in pieces.
The wildest horse, in the end,
submits to the bit and halter
just like the rest.
People without power,
ordinary citizens,
must necessarily obey
those in authority over them.
This woman is very proud.
That was obvious
in the first place
when she broke the law
and is even clearer now.
She glories in the crime
she has committed
and insults me to my face
as well as ignoring my decree.
If she is allowed
to flout the law in this way,
all authority in the state
will collapse.
I will not have that.
There will be no
exchanging of roles here,
me playing the woman
while she plays the king.
She is my niece,
my sister's child,
but I am the law,
and that responsibility
is above kinship.
Were she even closer,
the closest, my own daughter,
my duty would be plain.
Well,
the law has its weapons,
and they will strike at her
and at her sister too,
her accomplice, I have no doubt,
in this illegal act,
to the full extent
of the punishment prescribed.
The other one, Ismene,
bring her here.
I saw her in the corridor
talking to herself
some moments ago
and, I suppose, in tears.
Guilty consciences, you see,
can never be hidden completely.
The human face
reveals conspiracies
before they are enacted
again and again.
There's nothing more disgusting
than the confessed criminal
who tries to justify his actions
as this woman has done
here today.
- I'm bored with your talk.
Kill me and have done with it!
- Well, there's no hurry.
The progress of the law
is majestic and inexorable.
And that satisfies me.
- Why waste so much time?
Nothing you say will be
of the slightest interest to me,
and my arguments
you will not listen to.
I've done what I said I'd do.
I've buried my brother.
I aspire to no greater honor.
And if I am to be famous,
let it be for that.
All these,
these senators of yours,
they all agree with me
in their hearts.
But there's no gag like terror,
is there, gentlemen?
And kings must have their way,
both in word and action
one way or the other.
- You're quite mistaken.
None of my subjects anywhere
in the city thinks as you do.
- They all do, but they're
too afraid to speak.
- Not at all,
and you should be ashamed,
setting yourself up
against the majority,
disregarding the will
of the people.
- I love my brother.
I honor him dead
as I loved him living.
There's no shame in that.
- The one he murdered,
wasn't he your brother?
- My mother bore them both,
and I loved them both.
- If you honor one,
you insult the other.
- Neither of those dead men
would say that.
- Eteocles would.
His brother was a traitor.
Does he merit no greater respect
than that?
- But he was not an animal.
They both died together,
and they were both men.
- Yeah, the one died
defending his country,
while the other
traitorously attacked it.
- The dead have their rights,
and we have our duties towards them
dictated by common decency.
- And if good and bad
are to be honored equally,
where are our values,
patriotism, civic duty?
- Death is another country.
Such things may not be valued there,
may even be crimes.
- An enemy is still an enemy,
dead or alive.
- No.
I don't think so.
I have love enough to share,
no hate for anyone.
- Very well, share your love,
by all means.
Share it with the dead.
I wish them well of it.
Women must learn to obey
as well as men.
They can have
no special treatment.
Law is law
and will remain so
while I am king.
And no woman
will get the better of me.
[loud grinding noise]
- Look, senators!
- Ismene!
- Guard ye!
- Her face is raw with tears.
- Half dragged
from her quarters.
- You can see the story
in her face.
- A lifetime of agonies...
- And fears.
- The bitter legacy
of Oedipus' daughters.
- [whimpers]
- And you, snake,
slithering silently
about my house
to drink my blood in secret.
Both of you the same.
I looked the other way,
and like terrorists,
you laid undercover plans
to destroy me.
You.
Do you confess
your complicity in this crime
or protest your innocence?
- Yes.
I confess,
if she will allow me to say so.
I was fully involved,
and if she is guilty, so am I.
- No!
That isn't justice!
When I asked for help,
you refused me,
so I told you I didn't want you;
I'd do it alone.
- But now that you're
in danger, Antigone,
I'm proud to stand beside you
in the dock.
- The dead man
knows who buried him.
They all know down there.
What people say doesn't
impress me, only what they do.
- Please, my sister,
don't despise me.
Let me share the honor
and die with you.
- You've no right
to claim the honor
for doing
what you were afraid to do!
One death will be enough.
Why should you die?
- Because I can't live
without you.
- Ask Creon to help you.
He's your uncle
and your king, of course.
You're a born subject.
- Do I deserve such contempt?
Do you enjoy making fun of me,
sneering in front
of all these people?
- You're right.
It's a sad reflection on me
if such bitter pleasures
are all I have left.
- Well, let me help you, then.
It's not too late.
- Save your own life.
Do that for yourself without
any criticism from me or envy.
- For God's sake, Antigone,
will you not let me even die
with my sister?
- No, I won't.
You chose to live
when I chose to die,
and that's the end of it.
- But I warned you
this would happen.
I knew how it would be.
- And most, the majority
would agree with you,
but some would be of my opinion.
- But now we're both accused,
both sentenced.
- No.
You must live!
I have been dead
for a long time inwardly.
I am well suited to pay honor
to the dead and die for it.
- These women
are neurotic lunatics,
both of them,
one of them going off her head
before our eyes,
the other one born unbalanced.
- Well, are you surprised?
Anyone would crack the most
tough-minded person
under such treatment.
- You lost your senses
when you allowed yourself
to be influenced by her lunacy.
- There's no life for me here,
not without her.
- She's not here.
She's as good as dead.
- Will you kill the woman
your son plans to marry?
- There are other women,
no lack of choice
for a young man,
other fields to plow.
- They're devoted
to each other.
You can't change love
as you change your clothes.
- No son of mine
can marry a criminal.
- When Haemon hears
how his father insults--
- Let him hear!
What does his mistress
matter to me?
- My lord Creon,
you insult your own.
They are formally betrothed.
- Will you tear the woman
from your own son's arms?
- I will not part them.
Death will.
- If that's how the land lies,
the poor child's doomed.
- Her death warrant
sealed and delivered.
- By you, gentlemen,
if you remember,
as well as by me.
You heard the order,
agreed it with me,
if only by your silence,
did you not,
before the criminal was known?
We'll have no more
shilly-shallying.
Take them away.
Lock them up.
Keep them under close guard.
It's time they understood
they are women
and their proper place
in this society.
There's nothing like
the immediate threat of death
to soften up their rhetoric,
make them look reality
in the face.
all: They can
call themselves lucky,
the fortunate few
who live their lives through,
never drinking
from the bitter cup of pain.
- But when one unlucky family
incurs the gods' malignity
from generation to generation,
they must swallow
the bitter potion
again and again.
- Just as rollers crash
and sea spray whips
on an exposed beach
and black clouds lower...
- And the gale from the north
screams through frozen lips
while the sea
casts up from its depths
a shower of pebbles
on the shore...
- And black sand
from the chasms of the ocean
darkens the strand.
- On every descendant
of the ancient line of Labdacus,
divine and merciless
retribution falls.
- In the unremembered past,
some unforgiving Olympian
cast the weight of his vengeance
on the whole race...
- So that agony,
destruction, disgrace
destroys son and daughter
and darkens their halls
with tragedy.
- The cold hands of the dead
reach out for the living,
and no one is spared.
- Another generation
sheds its blood.
New light is snuffed out
and the young root bared
for the same bloody ax.
- The characteristic sin
of Oedipus, arrogance,
brings its bleak harvest in.
all: For Zeus is all-powerful.
No man can match him.
He never sleeps
as man must sleep.
- And time,
which leaves its mark
on fair complexions and dark,
can never engrave his face...
- Or dim the brightness
of his palace
where the gods
keep their ageless court
at the utmost peak
of sublime Olympus.
- Zeus is master there.
- And well do
the wise men speak
who say
that past and future time
he holds in his hand
by rights.
- And that those who climb
in their greatness or wickedness
beyond the permitted height
he brings to destruction
and despair.
- But all men hope...
- And some have ambition.
- Far-ranging birds
that never tire...
- Whose wings bear some
to their own good...
- And others
in a more frivolous mood...
- To the brightly lit pathway
that leads to destruction...
- And disaster...
- And the merciless fire.
- And no man can claim to have
understood hope or ambition
till the flames
burn under his feet.
- And the one solid wood
of his life
is reduced
to its last condition:
ashes and dust.
- A wise man said
from out of the depths
of his inspiration...
- When a man commits crimes
and is proud of the action,
a flaming sword
hangs over his head.
all: No future
but the grave
and the funeral urn.
- Creon,
here comes your youngest son,
desperate with grief...
- That his future bride
should be so brutally denied...
- And all his hopes
of happiness gone.
- For the last of your sons,
what relief
from his consuming fears
and the bitter penance of tears?
- Has he come
to beg for mercy...
- For his beloved Antigone?
- We shall learn that
from his own lips,
without any need
of fortune-tellers.
My dear son,
I don't doubt you've heard
the news of our final decision:
the condemnation
of your former fiancee.
You come here, I hope,
not in any spirit of anger
against your father
but understanding
that we are always comrades
and my love for you is unshaken.
- I know I'm your son,
father.
I understand
the depth of your experience
in matters of state,
and I try to follow
and to benefit from it
whenever I can.
Any marriage
would be worthless to me
that didn't have
your approval and love.
- Good fellow.
Well said.
A father's opinion should always
be influential with his sons.
And fathers with young sons,
when they pray for them
ask especially
that they should grow up
to be loyal, reliable, obedient,
the first to strike
at their father's enemies
just as they are the first
to support his friends.
A father whose sons
yield no such profits
from the investment
of his parenthood
breeds grief and sorrow
as his offspring
and becomes himself
a figure of fun,
especially to his enemies.
Don't be taken in, boy.
Don't let any woman
ensnare you
by exploiting her sexuality
or any of the attractions
that lure infatuated men
into submission.
God help the lovesick fool
who marries a dominating woman.
Passion never lasts,
and a cold bedroom
breeds cold hearts,
anger, and bitterness,
for there's no hatred so violent
as the hatred of two people
who were once in love.
Get rid of her, my boy.
This girl's an enemy,
no good to you
or your best interests.
Kick her out.
Let her find herself a husband
that suits her among the dead.
Don't deceive yourself.
She has been openly apprehended
performing a criminal act
against the state.
She's a confessed traitor,
and if I were to spare her life,
I too would betray
the state and its law
and everything I stand for.
I will not do it,
and she must die.
Let her pray to Zeus
till she drops.
Let her assert
she stands for family love
and ancient virtues
and all the rest of it.
If I tolerate treachery in
my own house under my very nose,
how can I crush subversion
anywhere else in the city
or in the state at large?
The man who rules wisely
within his own family
is more likely
to make sensible judgments
in political matters
in his direction of the state.
To pervert the law,
to twist it
to serve one's own ends
or the interests
of one's relations,
that cannot be allowed
neither in states nor in cities
and will not be allowed
by me in any circumstances.
Unquestioning obedience
to whomsoever the state appoints
to be its ruler
is the law,
as far as I'm concerned.
And this applies to small things
as well as great ones,
just or unjust, right or wrong.
For who is to choose
these things but the king?
The man who is wise
in his direction of his family
will be equally firm in power.
His wisdom
will be equally remarkable
whether as king or, indeed,
as subject.
In times of war
and national danger,
he will be the man
you can rely on,
the man you feel safe with
fighting beside you
in the front rank when
the battle becomes critical.
Indiscipline, anarchy,
disobedience:
what greater scourge than that
for humankind?
States collapse from within,
cities are blown to rubble,
efficient armies
are disorganized,
a potential victory
turned to disaster and carnage,
and all by disobedience,
anarchy, indiscipline,
whereas the well-conditioned
army that asks no questions
stands firm, knows nothing,
needs to know nothing, and wins,
thus saving the lives
of millions of honest people.
Authority is essential
in any state
and will be upheld
in this one by me.
There will be no yielding
to female fantasies,
not by so much as an inch.
And if we must be deposed,
let it be by a man's hand,
eh, son,
not by a conspiracy of women.
- If an old man
is fit to be judge, Lord Creon,
you have spoken rationally,
sensibly,
and with the wisdom
gathered from long experience.
- Father,
the most enviable
of a man's gifts
is the ability
to reason clearly.
And it's not for me
to say you're wrong,
even if I were clever enough
or experienced enough,
which I'm not,
but it's also true to say
that some men think differently
about these things.
And as your son, my most useful
function, it seems to me,
is to keep you in touch with
what other people are thinking,
what they say and do
and approve or disapprove of
and sometimes
what they leave unsaid.
The prospect of your disapproval
is a great silencer
of most men's tongues,
and some things are never said
for fear of the consequences.
But I can sometimes hear
what people whisper
behind their hands,
and everywhere
I hear sympathy expressed
for this unfortunate girl,
condemned as she is
to a horrifying death
which no woman
has ever suffered before
and unjustly
in most people's eyes.
In burying her brother
who was killed in action,
she did something
that most people consider
decent and honorable
rather than leaving him
naked on the battlefield
for the dogs to tear at
and kites and scavengers
to pick to the bone.
She should be given a medal
for it, those same people say,
and her name inscribed
on the roll of honor.
These things are whispered
in secret, father,
and they've reached my ears.
Sir, your reputation
matters to me
as much as your good health
and happiness does.
Indeed, your good name
matters more.
What could a loving son
be more jealous of
than his father's reputation?
And what could
please a father more
than to see his son's concern
that people
will think well of him?
And let me beg you
to have second thoughts
and not be certain
that your own opinion
is the only right one
and that all men share it.
The man who thinks
he has the monopoly of wisdom
and only what he says and what
he thinks is of any relevance
reveals his own
shallowness of mind
with every word he says.
The man of judgment
knows it's a sign of strength,
not weakness,
to value others' opinions
and to learn from them
and when he's wrong,
to admit it openly
and change his mind.
You see it when a river floods.
The trees that bend survive.
Those whose trunks
are inflexible
are snapped off short
by the weight of water.
And a sailor in a storm
who refuses to reef his sail
and run with the wind
is likely to end up capsized.
I beg you, father;
think twice about this.
Don't let your anger
influence you.
If a man of my age
may lay some small claim
to common sense,
let me say this:
absolute certainty is fine
if a man can be certain
that his wisdom is absolute.
But such certainty and such
wisdom is rare among men,
and that being so,
the next best
is to learn to listen
and to take good advice
when it's offered.
- There's a lot of sense,
my lord Creon,
in what this young man has said,
as indeed there was
in everything that you said too.
The fact is,
you are both in the right,
and there's a good deal
to be said for either.
- Is there indeed?
Am I expected to listen
and take lessons
in political tactics
at my age from a mere boy?
- I'm a man, Father,
and my arguments stand
upon their merits, not my age.
I am for common justice,
no more than that.
- Oh, they stand
upon their merits, do they?
For what merit is there,
please tell me,
in breaking the law?
- I wouldn't defend her
if she'd broken the law.
- But she has broken it,
openly, flagrantly!
- Listen to the people
in the streets, Father,
the ordinary Thebans.
They say she has not!
- I have never
based my political principles
on the opinions
of people in the streets!
- Now you're the one
who's speaking like a boy.
- I am speaking like a king!
It is my decision!
I will act
according to my own convictions.
- When the state
becomes one man,
it ceases to be a state.
- The state
is the statesman who rules it.
It reflects his judgment.
It belongs to him!
- Go and rule
in the desert, then.
There's no one there
to argue with you.
What a king you'll be there!
- This boy of mine
is on the women's side.
- Yes, if you're a woman, I am.
I'm on your side, Father.
You know that.
- You damned impertinent devil!
Every word you say
is against me, your own father.
- When I know you're wrong,
I have to speak.
- How am I wrong?
By maintaining my position
on the authority of the state;
is that wrong?
- When position and authority
ride roughshod of a moral field.
- You're weak and uxorious
and contemptible,
with no will of your own.
You're a woman's mouthpiece!
- I'm not ashamed
of what I'm saying.
- Every word you've said
pleads for her.
- I plead for you
and for myself
and for common humanity,
respect for the dead.
- You will never marry
that woman, never,
not this side of the grave.
- If she dies,
she won't die alone.
There will be two deaths,
not one.
- Are you threatening me?
How dare you threaten me!
- No, that's not a threat.
I'm telling you
your plan was misbegotten
from the beginning.
- Misbegotten!
Dear God, if anything's
misbegotten here, it's my son!
You'll regret this,
I promise you.
- If you weren't my father,
I'd say you were demented.
- Don't "father" me!
You're a woman's plaything,
a tame lapdog.
- Is anyone else
allowed to speak?
Must you have the last word
in everything?
Must all the rest of us
be gagged?
- I must, and I will.
And you, I promise
you will regret
what you've spoken here today.
I will not be sneered at
or contradicted by anyone.
Sons can be punished too.
Bring her out, the condemned woman,
the criminal.
Let her die here and now
in front of him,
this passionate bridegroom
of hers.
You can watch the execution.
- That's one sight
I shall never see,
nor from this moment, Father,
will you ever see me again.
Those that wish to stay
and watch
this disgusting spectacle
of tyranny and injustice
are welcome to it.
- My lord Creon,
your son is gone so desperate
and in such a hurry,
I am afraid for him.
- When young men are angry,
anything is possible.
- Let him go.
Let him do as he pleases.
Let him rave himself senseless.
It's all noise and nonsense.
The two women are sentenced!
It'll take more than that
to reprieve them, I promise you.
- Both of them, sir?
You mean to put
both of the sisters to death?
- No, you're right.
I can take advice.
The one who covered the body,
not the other.
- And for the condemned one?
- What manner of death?
- Take her
to some lonely place,
a desert unfrequented by anyone,
find a cave,
and wall her up in it.
Bury her alive!
But with just enough food
so that no guilt for her death
will fall upon us,
neither state nor city.
She'll have plenty of time
to honor
the gods of the dead there,
since they receive
so many of her prayers.
They will release her
one way or the other,
and she will learn
that worshipping the dead
is not the business
of the living.
- When the god
of unbridled passion makes war,
he always wins.
- No force on earth
can withstand
his powerful, merciless hand.
- When the first flowers appear
in a young girl's cheeks,
remorseless magic begins.
- And then from the deepest
valley to the highest peak,
his traps are set.
- And no man's sins or virtues
can keep him from the net.
- The mania is universal.
- The gods themselves run mad.
- Men lose their wits,
and no one is spared.
- When the madness strikes,
no one is safe.
The maturest of men
will commit follies
and crimes
undreamed of in saner times.
- What else could provoke this
strife between father and son,
this family divided
and murderous anger between kin?
- There is fire
in a woman's eye
incited by such consuming heat,
a man's mind can burn.
- Aphrodite shares powers
with Zeus!
- Her seat
is at his right hand!
- Her lightning
strikes the heart,
and its power is frightening!
[loud gong chimes]
[deep grinding noise]
- Yet how can we talk
of justice
and the needs of the state...
- While we stand and watch
this unendurable sight?
- My eyes will have their way
and weep
seeing Antigone,
calm as a bride
going to her bedchamber...
- To marry the dead
and share
their everlasting sleep.
- In all my wanderings,
gentlemen,
this place has been my home.
I was born in this city,
and now I begin my last journey.
I look up at the Sun
in its familiar sky
and feel its warmth on my face,
only to say good-bye.
In the daytime of my life,
in mid breath, this security
policeman death arrests me
as he arrests everyone,
young and old,
at home or in the street.
To the cold waters of darkness
we come,
never to return
across that silent river.
No wedding for me,
no music,
no guests in the room.
My wedding gift
is eternity in a stone tomb,
my dowry forever not to be,
death my bridegroom.
- But your action is famous.
In every street,
mouths whisper "Antigone."
- You go down to the dead
with the promise of glory
ringing in your head
and nothing
to devalue your beauty.
No sword has scarred you,
plague visited.
- Unmarked, untouched,
you pass
from the dangerous light
into the safety
of eternal night,
alive, alone,
and free.
- Do you remember the sad story
of Tantalus' daughter?
She was a stranger from Phrygia
unmarried, like me,
in danger like mine.
She was sentenced to die
on the rock of Sipylus,
and there was no glory for her,
only the endless shock
of the elements
and the terrible place
where she was imprisoned,
the mountains' embrace like
fingers of ivy tying her down,
enclosing, entombing her,
and she all alone
while the snows blinded her
and the freezing rain
whipped her to rags
and exposed her pain
to the naked sky.
What bitter tears she shed
as she slowly turned to stone
and the gray rock petrified her
by inches,
and she died.
Her story is mine.
Today I shall share
her rocky bed.
- But she was a goddess,
not born for death
like the children of men...
- Whose desperate mortality
is their only certainty.
Would it soothe your pain
to share her destiny...
- Or soften your distress as,
alive in the earth,
you draw your last breath
like her to be living again?
- Are you laughing at me?
By everything this city of our fathers
has ever held sacred,
you landowners, you elder statesmen,
you rulers of Thebes,
my dying is no joke!
Am I a figure of fun
to be mocked like this
and publicly humiliated
as I leave you forever?
Then forests and meadows
and our Theban river,
glittering pathways
ceaselessly flowing
from Dirce's death till now,
flat lands thundering
beneath our chariots,
you must be my witnesses,
my only friends and mourners
as, victimized by an unjust law,
I go to my last home
in the living tomb to wait
while the slow darkness descends
cold and starving
on my stony bed
halfway between the living
and the dead.
- No one has ever dared
to go so far before
as you have dared to go.
- Now you have stumbled
and stubbed your toe
and will shortly shed your blood
on the marble staircase
of the law.
- You carry
your father's crimes
like a millstone on your back.
Small wonder in such times
if the bones bend or break.
- Nothing more painful
than that:
the remembrance
of my father's long agony
and the curse on my suffering family
from the beginning.
So much grief
from the unlucky chance
of the son
finding the mother's bed
and worse than anything,
the benighted offspring
of that unspeakable marriage.
And I, with the others,
share that terrible destiny.
Conceived in incest,
no repentance
can soften the punishment.
The years pass,
the agony increases,
and there is no pity
for our tears.
No marriage for me, for certain.
I shall close that book forever
as I meet my mother and father
in the shade.
The weddings will cease!
Marriage to the woman of Argos
finished my brother
and finished me too.
There will never be another.
- To pay respect to the dead
is praiseworthy,
an act of love.
And religion
must have its due...
- But no civilized state
can eschew authority.
Laws must be obeyed,
whether you approve
or disapprove.
- You refuse to sanction
the power of the state.
You invite disaster
and connive at your own fate.
- Spare me your sympathy.
Weep no false tears.
I know the path
that I must follow
to the sunless country
of eternal sorrow,
the bleak waters of eternity,
the unimaginable years.
No grief where none is felt.
I shall go alone and in silence
to my house of stone.
- If death could be prevented
by singing arias about it
or other self-indulgent
displays of grief,
this performance would go on forever,
I've no doubt,
but I've had enough of it.
Take her away.
Lock her up in her stone vault
with half a mountain for a roof,
and then brick up the door.
Let her die there
if she chooses,
or if she prefers to stay alive
in her grave, she can,
because the grave's
the only fit place for her,
solitary confinement
among the dead.
Whatever she does,
there will be no guilt
on me or on the city.
Her death's her own,
but there's no place for her
among the living.
- To my grave, then,
my honeymoon bed,
my prison,
my crypt
under the mountain,
my home for the rest of time.
I shall meet
so many of my relations there.
We shall all be guests
of that sad-faced queen
of the shadows, Persephone,
in that bleak hotel
that is never short of a room.
I am the last,
the unhappiest, I think,
and the youngest,
booking in too soon,
but my father will be there
to meet me at the door.
My mother will smile
and hold me as she often did,
and my brother,
he will be glad to see me
more than all the rest.
At each fresh grave,
my hands sprinkled the earth,
at each,
I poured the purifying water
and made offerings.
And for my beloved Polynices,
whose broken body I set to rest,
I am rewarded
with a shameful death.
There are some, I know,
more thoughtful people
who respect my action.
They must justify me.
Not for a husband,
do you understand,
not even for a son
would I have done this.
If the law had forbidden it,
I would have bowed my head
and let them rot.
Does that make sense?
I could have married again,
another husband,
had more children by him
if the first had died.
Do you see?
Well, do you understand me?
My mother and father are dead.
There can be no more brothers,
never again.
My love had to speak
at Polynices' grave or nowhere.
And for that,
Creon sentences me to death,
drags me here,
and will shut me away
in a cavern under the mountain,
a living death in silence
and darkness and solitude.
I shall die unmarried.
All those pleasures denied me
and motherhood denied too,
no children to love me;
to love.
And now, no friends.
What moral law have I broken?
What eternal truths
have I denied?
Yet now not even a god
can help me,
and there's no man who will;
I'm sure of that.
No help and no hope.
How can there be,
when common decency
has become a crime?
If the gods in heaven
have changed their minds
and this is the way
they order things now,
I shall soon know it,
and I shall have learned
my lesson the hard way.
But if some others are mistaken,
let them be punished
as I have been punished,
no worse than that
and no less either.
- She hasn't changed,
even now.
- The anger inside her
still blows like a hurricane.
- The sooner
she's got rid of,
shut up out of harm's way
and forgotten,
the better.
Tell those guards to get a move on,
or they'll regret it.
- That word is my death.
- Now it is spoken.
Don't comfort yourself
with hope.
There's none.
- This is the land
of my fathers,
Thebes,
built by a god.
You see, senators,
my time has run out.
There's no more left.
I am the last
of the royal blood,
a daughter of kings,
and I die his victim,
unjustly,
for upholding justice
and the humanity of humankind.
- Others have suffered,
my child, like you.
- Upon Danae too,
the same dreadful sentence
was passed.
- Far from the light of day,
in a tower of brass,
she was shut away.
- And that one single room,
both prison and tomb...
- Became her wedding chamber
at last.
- Like you,
she was a child of kings,
yet in her womb,
the semen of Zeus,
descending in a golden shower...
- Made a mockery
of the brazen tower.
- Fate has its own momentum.
When things must be,
they will be.
- What use is power
in the state or wealth...
- Massive armies,
an unsinkable fleet?
- Guards make their entrances
by strength or stealth.
- And no tombs or towers
can keep them out.
- The arrogant king Lycurgus
discovered wisdom
when he angered the god Dionysus
with his railing.
That proud Edonian king
was punished with madness...
- And long imprisoned
in a rocky cell
to endure the private
and particular hell of lunacy
till the healing silence soothed
and reordered his brain.
He learned there
the terrible power
of the god he had challenged.
- Ecstasy is beyond
man's understanding,
a mystery deeper than reason
which overcomes pain
and seeks truth in intoxication
and terror.
- Only a fool would attempt
to stop the maenads
in full flight
or silence
their ecstatic singing.
- The sleep of reason
is not darkness...
- But another kind of light.
- And where the gloomy rocks
divide the seas in Thrace,
by the Bosphorus...
- The savage god Ares laughed
to see the sons of Phineus
blinded with a spindle.
- Nothing could placate their
vengeful stepmother's hate.
- Her bloody needle
darkened their eyes forever...
- Blinding the children...
- As the gods
had blinded the father.
- On their mother's
wedding day,
their destiny was settled.
- Their wasted lives
they wept away
in sightless misery.
- Yet she was descended
from the gods.
- In the echoing caves
of the north wind,
she hollooed as a child...
- And on
the open mountainside...
- Ran wild with the horses.
all: Man's fate is determined,
will not be denied.
The child Antigone
pays for the parents' pride.
- Senators of Thebes
and your new King Creon,
we've traveled together,
my boy and I,
sharing one pair of eyes
between the two of us,
which is the way blind men
must make their journeys.
- Tiresias.
What news brings an old man
such a distance?
- Important news
that can't wait
and advice which,
if you're wise, you'll listen to.
- I've always listened,
acted upon it too, more than once.
- Like a sensible captain
who values his pilot,
you've avoided the rocks.
- I admit it; we all do.
We're in your debt.
- Then for God's sake,
listen to me now.
You're like a man
balanced on a razor,
likely to fall
or cut himself to pieces.
- Are you serious?
Any man would shudder,
hearing such things
from your lips that
have foretold so many horrors.
Tell me what you mean.
- Oh, yes, I intend to.
Everything my experience
of forecasting the future
and understanding symbols
reveal to me,
I will make plain to you.
I was sitting in my usual seat,
a place where
I can hear the singing
in the secret language
of the birds
and understand their meaning,
when I heard,
quite unexpectedly,
a terrible new sound,
like shrieking
or cries of anguish,
hysterical twittering
and whistling
like the babble
of a barbaric language
capable of expressing
only hatred or pain.
By that
and the wild beating of wings,
I knew the birds were at war.
Such sounds
could mean nothing else.
I could well imagine
their blood-stained beaks
and dripping claws,
and that thought
disturbed me deeply.
At once, I went to my altar
to see what I could learn
from the sacrifice by fire,
but nothing would burn.
A stinking liquid
fell from the flesh
and dropped on the embers
and sizzled and bubbled
among the ashes.
Then the gallbladder burst,
spurting stinking acid
across the meat,
and all the fat melted
and was rendered down
till the bone was left bare.
I saw all this,
or my boy saw it.
He sees for me
what my eyes cannot,
just as I see things to which
other people are blind,
but from that filth,
I read nothing.
The oracle was clogged
with fat and decay.
And then it was revealed.
I understood that you,
King Creon,
hath decreed this filth
that chokes our altars.
The blood and flesh
which decays and stinks there
is the blood and flesh vomited
from the gullets of dogs
and carrion crows.
The blood of Polynices,
the flesh of that unluckiest
of the sons of Oedipus,
still unburied
and affronting
more than our sense of smell.
The gods themselves
are disgusted.
They reject our prayers
and sacrifices.
How could they do otherwise?
How can the birds
sing of anything but horrors
blown out
of this banquet of human blood,
clogged and stinking
till their very beaks drip with it?
My son, listen to me.
Any man can make a mistake
or commit a crime.
The man who can
recognize what he has done,
see that he is mistaken
and are morally wrong,
admits it and puts it right,
that man proves that there is
never too late to become wise,
and no one will condemn him.
But if he compounds
his stupidity with stubbornness
and an obstinate refusal
to face the facts,
he is nothing but a fool.
Is there anyone more stupid
than a stupid man
who cannot see
his own stupidity?
Polynices is dead.
Don't revenge yourself
on his remains.
You can kill a man once
and once only.
Is there any glory to be gained
by defeating a poor corpse?
This is good advice, my son,
sincerely offered
by one who wishes you well.
Take it.
- So that's your news,
is it, old man?
I am to be the target, am I,
for everyone to shoot at?
Well, I am wise too,
wise to the ways
of fortune-tellers
and the buying and selling
you all go in for,
and I am to be
the latest bargain, I see.
I am to be bought and sold
like silver
from the mines of Sardis
or gold from India.
I am to be part of the trade.
Well, let me tell you this,
Tiresias.
There is not enough gold
in the world
to buy a grave for that man!
If golden eagles
should carry him up
by joints and shreds to Zeus
and spew him in gobbets
on the marble floor of Olympus,
not even that blasphemy
would be enough
to defect me from my purpose,
because I know
that no single human act,
however much
it may degrade the earth
and the man who perpetrates
or suffer it,
can stain the purity
of the ever-living gods.
But let me tell you this,
Tiresias.
A man can fall.
He can fall like a stone,
especially when he pretends
to give good advice
and wraps it up in
a profound cloak of religiosity
when all the time,
naked self-interest
and the greed for profit
are the only motives
that matter to him.
- Are there any wise men
left anywhere?
- Oh, how profound.
Do you have any other thunderous
platitudes to follow that one?
- Mature judgment
cannot be bought.
No treasure is as valuable,
and good advice is worth
more than a fortune to any man--
- Bad advice
is worse than worthless,
a disease which infects
the wisest of men.
- You describe
your own symptoms exactly.
- Well, then,
my so-called prophet, tell me,
will any of these insults
be of any benefit to anyone?
- None at all.
And yet you insult me.
You say that my predictions
are both false and dishonest.
- That is because
all fortune-tellers
are money-grubbers
and charlatans.
- Kings too have been known
to be acquisitive.
- Do you know the man
you're speaking to?
I am the king.
- You are the king, yes.
My good advice
helped to make you one.
- Oh, you've had your
successes; I know that.
You've been proved right
on more than one occasion,
but honesty is another matter.
I've never trusted you.
- Don't provoke me
to tell you everything.
- What do you mean?
- Everything I know.
- Say what you like.
Say anything at all,
but say it honestly,
not for cash!
- Are you really
foolish enough to believe
that money
has ever been my motive?
- Because my integrity
is not for sale.
Tell your buyer that,
whoever he is!
- Listen, Creon,
this is the truth.
Before many more days,
before the Sun has risen,
well, shall we say
a few more times,
you will have made your payment
corpse for corpse
with a child of your own blood.
You have buried
the one still living.
The woman
who moves and breathes
you have given to the grave
and the man you have left
unwashed, unwept,
and without the common courtesy
of a decent covering of earth
so that both have been wronged,
and the gods of the underworld
to whom the body justly belongs
are denied it and are insulted.
Such matters
are not for you to judge.
You usurp ancient rites
which even the gods themselves
don't dare to question,
powers that are not
within the prerogative of kings.
Even now, this minute,
the avengers are on their way.
The furies, who rise up from hell
and swoop down from heaven
fix their hooks
in those who commit crimes
and will never let go.
The suffering
that you inflicted on others
will be inflicted upon you.
You will suffer as they did.
Have I been bribed,
do you think?
Am I speaking for money now?
Before very long--
yes, it will be soon--
there will be screaming
and bitter tears
and hysterical crying
in this house,
men as well as women.
Other cities too, other states,
will turn upon you
for the crime
you have committed.
Dogs and vultures
will swarm in the streets,
dropping fragments
of the unburied man
in corners, on doorsteps,
in the public squares.
They will smell the pollution
and turn to you, its author.
That is all I have to say.
You made me angry, Creon,
with your crude accusations,
and so I made you my target.
And like a good marksman,
all my shots have hit the bull.
You can feel them, can't you?
You can feel the pain
like an arrow here.
Take me home now, boy.
Leave him alone
to entertain
some younger ears than mine
with his ridiculous outbursts--
either that or let him learn
maturer judgments
and how a wise man
controls his tongue.
- My lord,
he's gone, promising nothing
but disaster to come.
My hair grew gray in this city.
I was dark-haired here;
soon I will be white,
and in all that time,
I've never known
any of his prophecies
to be proved wrong.
- Neither have I, man.
I know that much as well as you.
My mind's torn apart
like a tug of war,
one way, then the other.
How can I give way now?
Yet how can I stand here
like a fool
and wait stubbornly for whatever
it is that's coming?
- Lord Creon,
it's time to take good advice.
- Give it, then.
Don't be afraid; I'll listen.
- Release the woman
from her underground prison.
- And give honorable burial
to the dead man.
- So that's your advice:
total collapse,
complete withdrawal.
Do you all think that?
- We do, sir.
And do it quickly,
for heaven's sake.
- The gods never move faster
than when punishing men
with the consequences
of their own actions.
- How can I do it?
It's unendurable
to deny every principle
and every action
I've stood fast by.
Yet I dare not stand against
the iron laws of necessity.
- Go on, sir; do it now,
and do it personally.
- Not by proxy,
with your own hands.
- Yes, I'll go.
I'll go this instant.
Somebody, anybody,
bring spades
and sledgehammers
out onto the mountain.
I'm coming with you.
If I've changed my mind,
I will act upon it
with exactly the same determination.
I sentenced her,
and I'll set her free,
tear down bricks
with my own hands, if necessary.
Perhaps it is wisest
to let the old laws stand.
My fear tells me it is,
and that's a voice
every prudent man
must listen to.
all: Great God with many names,
child of the thunder,
whom Zeus conceived
on Cadmus' daughter
here in Thebes
Bacchus, Dionysus...
- In Italy revered...
- In Demeter's
mysterious illuses...
- Where all grace dreams
its most secret dream...
- Both praised and feared.
all: This is your naked city...
- Where the quiet river
of Ismenus waters the meadows...
- Where the feeble of ecstasy
possesses your womenfolk...
all: Your known Thebes...
- Where the dragon's teeth
press on.
- The whole world worships you,
wine god, intoxicator...
- On the two-pronged mountain
where the torches glitter
and the nymphs
of Parnassus dance...
- By the pool where Castalia's
suicide made the waters magical,
and the cool draft
inspires poets to frenzy
and the true waters
of darkness reside.
- From the impenetrable
slopes of Nysa,
where the ivy runs wild
and the vines
hang thick in your face,
come home, Theban child.
Let the world
sing its hymns in vain
in the Theban streets...
all: Hail!
- We shout.
all: Bacchus, hail!
And the city waits.
- Your mother, Semele,
died here...
- Incinerated by the fire
of the universe...
- Zeus, in his splendor.
- Now in your city,
another disaster threatens.
- Fear locks up our tongues...
- And, like a plague sore
on the face,
the state's disease
is made public.
- We have done wrong.
- Know the first necessity
is for healing...
- In Parnassus' rocky stream...
- Or over the sighing waters
of the endless seas.
- Come to us, healer, and heal!
- We have suffered too long.
all: All the stars of the galaxy
whose hearts are fire
throb to your music
and in those voices
of measureless night
speak from the depths
of their mystery.
- Come, with
your crazed followers,
your lunatic wind,
the wild maenads,
authentic son of Zeus...
- Bring delight
and dancing till we drop...
- Bring rest; bring peace...
- Bring healing and rebirth...
- Let our anguish cease...
all: Ecstatic God
whose many names are one.
- Senators, listen!
Descendants of Cadmus
who founded our city
and Amphion who built it,
good people of Thebes,
no man's life ever moves
smoothly according to plan.
Who can make judgments,
say this is praiseworthy
in human existence
and this is to be despised,
when chance rules everything?
One moment a man rides high
on his fortune,
and the same moment,
he crashes to the depths.
Luck, like the tide, is certain
to ebb after the flow,
and no man can tell
what will happen tomorrow.
Everyone surely envied Creon.
He had brought his country
out of anarchy,
taken power as king,
and his position in the state
was unchallenged.
What's more, he ruled well,
if firmly,
and his son was at his side
to help and succeed him.
All that is over now.
What life can there be
when the things that make life pleasant
are all destroyed,
a kind of death,
moving and breathing but not living?
That's how it is for him.
Of course,
he's rich beyond accounting.
He's a king still,
with all the pomp and
circumstance that rank implies,
but what's it worth
when all the joy of life
is gone,
a shadow, a mockery,
a vulgar pageant?
Who can take pleasure
in wealth or power
when all happiness
is dead in his heart?
- More tragedy for this family.
- Tell us your news.
- They're both dead,
and the living
must take the blame.
- Who's dead?
- Who killed them?
- What happened?
Tell us.
- The king's son Haemon,
the royal blood shed
by a royal hand.
- His father, you mean?
- Or his own.
- His own held the sword,
but his father's actions
drove it home.
- The prophet warned us.
- And it all came true.
- That's how things are.
It's in your hands now.
- The door is opening.
Look!
- Here's Eurydice...
- Poor woman...
- The king's wife.
- Does she know, do you think?
- Has she come here
by chance...
- Or because she has heard
her son is dead?
- Gentlemen,
good friends,
my ears caught something
of what you were saying,
a few words
as I opened the door.
I was on my way to offer prayers
to Pallas Athenae.
We had just drawn back the bolt
when I heard a few scraps
of your conversation.
It was enough
to make me fear
what all mothers fear:
an accident or some disaster
to those we love.
I nearly fainted.
My ladies-in-waiting
caught me in their arms.
Please speak it out plainly.
Whatever it is, I can bear it.
We are bred to stoicism
in this family.
- Dear queen,
whom we all respect,
I was there; I saw it all,
and I'll tell you
exactly what happened.
There's no point in trying
to soften the blow now,
only to be proved a liar later.
It's best to tell the truth.
I went with the king,
your husband,
to the edge of the battlefield,
where we saw
the body of Polynices
still lying where he fell
and in a terrible state.
The dogs had been at him.
So we prayed,
first to Hecate,
who haunts crossroads and tombs
and the scenes
of crimes committed
but not atoned for,
and then to Pluto,
king of the dead.
We asked them
to have pity on him and on us
and not to be angry.
Then we washed him,
or what was left of him,
with holy water,
cut fresh branches
to make a pyre,
and burned the remains.
Then we shoveled a mound
of his own Theban earth
over the ashes.
And as soon as we had done that,
we hurried off
as fast as we could
to the prison cell
under the mountain
that served as a bridal suite
for the girl married to death.
But before we arrived,
one of the soldiers
with the unenviable job
of guarding
that godforsaken place
came running back
to tell the king
that he'd heard a terrible noise
like screaming
from inside the mountain.
And as Creon got nearer,
he heard it too,
faint but audible,
a kind of weird screaming
or moaning,
low and unearthly,
as though grief was speaking
its own naked language.
When the king heard it,
he groaned aloud,
and we all heard him say,
"Oh, God,
"this is what I was afraid of.
"Am I a prophet too?
"This path up to the tomb,
these last few steps
"is the most agonizing journey
I shall ever make.
"I can hear my son's voice
in there.
"You, quickly!
Guards, anybody, get in there!
"Squeeze between the rocks
"where somebody
has already forced an entrance.
"Get into the main chamber
of the cave
"and tell me if it is
my son's voice I recognized
"or whether the guards
are playing
some cruel trick with me."
So we went in and looked
as the half-crazed king
had told us to,
and there
in the darkest corner,
we saw her,
strung up by the neck,
hanging from an improvised rope
of twisted linen strips
torn from her own dress.
Haemon was right beside her,
cuddling her body
as it dangled there
and sobbing, brokenheartedly,
at his wife's death
and the marriage
bad luck
and his father's cruelty
had made certain
would never take place.
When Creon saw them,
he staggered into the cave,
crying like a child,
and sobbed aloud,
"My boy, my poor boy!
What are you doing here?"
And then,
"Have you gone mad coming here?
"There's nothing here for you
but death
"and annihilation
and despair.
"Come away from there, my son!
"I'm begging you, come away!
For god's sake, come away!"
The boy just looked at him,
and his eyes were terrifying,
with an anger
like I've never seen before.
Without a word,
he spat in his father's face
and drew his sword
and lunged
straight for the old man,
but Creon was quick
and skipped out of distance.
And the poor lad,
hysterical with grief,
braced his sword against a rock
and thrust himself upon it
so fiercely,
it pierced his belly
and came out through his back.
There was blood everywhere.
His life flooded away
before our eyes
as he clutched the dead girl.
Then his arms slowly slackened,
and the pumping blood
soaked her body
so that her dead cheek
flushed red again
with the bloodstain.
So now they're together,
two corpses married at last.
Whom death hath joined,
no man can put asunder.
They looked like honeymooners
together in one bed,
evidence of the havoc
man can bring upon man
by his own pigheadedness
and arrogance.
- Just a moment.
- The queen has gone
without a word.
- We've no indication of her feelings,
one way or the other.
- I'm sure
she had good reasons.
A public demonstration of grief
would be unlike her.
She'll suffer like any other mother
for her son's death
but in private, with her women.
She'd never do anything
foolish or indiscreet.
I'm sure of that.
She's far too sensible.
- I hope you're right.
- Her silence was unnerving...
- Dangerously unlike
what one would expect.
- That kind of silence
is sometimes
more frightening
than screaming or tears.
- I'll go in after her,
just to make sure
that grief doesn't tempt her
to anything silly or excessive.
You're right;
the silence was unnerving.
She seemed to feel nothing,
and in my opinion,
that can be dangerous.
- Look there.
The king is coming
but not alone.
A silent witness
comes before him,
dead as stone...
- Unspeaking evidence
that the crime,
like the grief,
is all his own.
He suffers now
for his wrongdoing.
- [sobbing]
Pain!
There was hatred inside me.
The urge to destroy
drove me like a maniac
in insane plunge towards death,
your death, my boy.
See here the victim
and his killer.
See here the father and his son.
I was responsible.
My actions killed him.
There is no blame for him,
none.
Blasted in the morning
of your life.
My hope, my joy,
my hand powered the knife.
My arrogance
determined your fate.
- You see the truth now...
- But you see it too late.
- Suffering is
the only schoolteacher.
The gods have broken my back,
whipped me like a beast
up this stony crag
and destroyed my self-respect.
All pleasure, all rejoicing,
they have turned
to anguish and weeping.
Man is a naked, mortal creature;
affliction is all
he can expect.
- My lord,
you have suffered enough,
but more suffering
is marked to your name.
One agony lies here in the open;
another is waiting,
the same anguish redoubled
behind the door.
- There can be nothing worse.
My heart is broken.
- But your wife,
the mother
of this slaughtered son;
her wound is still fresh,
but the breath of life is gone.
- Hades is deep, bottomless,
the abyss of the dead.
Will you kill me again
or bring me to my knees
to suffer longer,
beating my head insensible
with pain?
What can you say,
messenger of death
with a sad face,
more than you've said already?
My way is towards the darkness.
My case can be no worse
than it is.
Can you kill me again?
I'm dead already.
Will there be more blood,
more hacking of flesh,
more savagery, more pain?
First the son, then the mother.
No end to this grief?
- Open the door
and see for yourself.
- Unending,
unendurable pain.
This is the second time
I'm forced to see
what no man's eyes
should ever see even once.
Is this how it ends,
or will there be more torture,
more suffering?
A few moments ago, my trembling
arms embraced a dead son.
Now grief has snatched
the mother from my hands.
- It was there,
by the household shrine she stood,
still holding
the razor-sharp knife
and as darkness drew down
its slow blinds
and her eyes closed,
she spoke of Megareus,
who died in the fullness
of his youth,
her elder boy.
Nothing but good
was ever said of him.
And she wept for the son
whose life ended today
and with her last dying breath,
cursed you as his murderer
who drove him to this death.
- I think I shall go mad
with terror.
There must be a sword somewhere,
a sharp two-edged knife
to cut away my life!
Living is misery for me now,
forever!
Where I look,
I see blood everywhere.
- It's no more
than the truth I've told.
Her last word was to blame you
for both deaths: mother and son.
- How did she die?
Did she do it alone?
- She heard them weeping;
for Haemon, cried aloud
and skewered herself
with her own small sword.
- She spoke the truth.
All the guilt is mine.
I am the murderer.
Make that plain.
Somebody,
anybody, take me away.
I disgrace
the decent light of day.
I am nothing now.
I have become nothing.
Nothing can happen
to the man who is nothing.
- How can we judge the best
in times like these?
- Prompt action is safest.
What more is there to lose?
- I look for a friend now,
the shadowy messenger
who runs swifter than the wind,
to wrap me in darkness
as a friend should.
Why waste another day?
What good is daylight to me?
Why should my misery darken
the face of another dawn?
Pull down the blind.
- Tomorrow is a mystery.
No man can say
what time will make plain.
- We live day by day.
The future is
in greater hands than ours.
- I am nothing.
I want nothing,
my last simplest prayers.
- Prayers are a waste of time.
Why pray?
- What must come will come
tomorrow or today.
- I'm nothing.
Take me then:
the man who killed
without knowing it
his wife and son.
Where should I go then?
Left or right,
all wrong turnings now.
Into the night.
Darkness hide me.
There is blood on my hands.
My head is split.
My back is broken.
I should be dead.
- The key to human happiness
is to nurture wisdom
in your heart.
- For man
to attend to man's business
and let the gods
play their part.
- Above all,
to stand in awe
of the eternal unalterable law.
- The proud man may pretend,
in his arrogance,
to despise everything
but himself.
- In the end,
the gods will bring him
to grief.
- Today it has happened here.
With our own eyes,
we have seen an old man,
through suffering,
become wise.